Adding a getting started guide to the repo (#581)
doldecomp/melee: GETTING_STARTED.md

# Introduction

This doc is designed to help beginners get into Melee decompilation (and hopefully contribute). Also, we'll try to answer common questions here and talk about motivations for working on this project.

# Goals of the project

The goal of this repo is to **write C code that, after being compiled, matches the PowerPC assembly 100%**. There's a bit of nuance here though. Let’s first take a look at what we’re working with:

![compilation_diagram](images/compilation_diagram.png)

The details for what produces these different artifacts is out-of-scope. Here’s what some Melee C code looks like ([link](https://github.com/doldecomp/melee/blob/d00b11d0489b14401965c87bf386828d54fa0ccc/src/melee/ft/chara/ftMewtwo/ftMewtwo_SpecialHi.c#L5-L13)):

```c
void ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_CreateGFX(HSD_GObj* fighter_gobj)
{
    Fighter* fp = getFighter(fighter_gobj);

    ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_SetStartGFX(fighter_gobj);
    fp->cb.x21BC_callback_Accessory4 = NULL;
}
```

> and it’s corresponding PowerPC assembly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and its corresponding PowerPC assembly:
```

```asm
.global ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_CreateGFX
ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_CreateGFX:
/* 801450A0 00000000  7C 08 02 A6 */	mflr r0
/* 801450A4 00000004  90 01 00 04 */	stw r0, 0x4(r1)
/* 801450A8 00000008  94 21 FF E8 */	stwu r1, -0x18(r1)
/* 801450AC 0000000C  93 E1 00 14 */	stw r31, 0x14(r1)
/* 801450B0 00000010  83 E3 00 2C */	lwz r31, 0x2c(r3)
/* 801450B4 00000014  48 00 00 21 */	bl ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_SetStartGFX
/* 801450B8 00000018  38 00 00 00 */	li r0, 0x0
/* 801450BC 0000001C  90 1F 21 BC */	stw r0, 0x21bc(r31)
/* 801450C0 00000020  80 01 00 1C */	lwz r0, 0x1c(r1)
/* 801450C4 00000024  83 E1 00 14 */	lwz r31, 0x14(r1)
/* 801450C8 00000028  38 21 00 18 */	addi r1, r1, 0x18
/* 801450CC 0000002C  7C 08 03 A6 */	mtlr r0
/* 801450D0 00000030  4E 80 00 20 */	blr
```

> So the repo is filled with `.s` files and `.c` files, where the C code inside the `.c` files should have translated 100% to some contents in a `.s` file that used to be in the repo. Note that once we successfully decompile a function, we normally remove it from the assembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the repo is filled with `.s` files and `.c` files, where the C code inside the `.c` files, each of which are a 100% translation of its corresponding `.s` file that used to be in the repo. Note that once we successfully decompile a function, we remove it from the assembly.
```

# Do we have to write all this C code by hand?

No! And even initially, the code doesn’t have to be super-readable as we’re trying to get 100% match rate first.

So you can actually view the above example in an online tool that we use called decomp.me. Here’s a link to [that specific decompliation](https://decomp.me/scratch/ZN9lq). If you want to try doing this yourself, follow these steps:

1. Copy the assembly in the example
2. Hit “New Scratch”
3. Select Platform “GameCube / Wii”
4. Set the preset to “Super Smash Bros. Melee”
5. Copy in the contents of [this link](https://gist.github.com/stephenjayakar/73e9f7a1f77b9b2df281f0629b95290c) into the “Context” section. More on that later.
6. Copy in the ASM into “Target assembly” and hit “Create scratch”

When you initially create a new “scratch” in this site, it’ll actually do its best to decompile the assembly you give it (try hitting the “Decompile” button in the link). You’ll notice things it spits out like

```c
temp_r31 = arg0->unk2C;
```

> which can be translated in kind-of-English as “tempr31 takes the value at the memory address of `arg0 + 0x2c`.” If you don’t know anything about `arg1`, you can translate it to sketchy-C

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which can be translated in kind-of-English as “tempr31 takes the value at the memory address of `arg0 + 0x2c`.” If you don’t know anything about `arg0`, you can translate it to sketchy-C
```

Author: great catch. committing manually

# Introduction

This doc is designed to help beginners get into Melee decompilation (and hopefully contribute). Also, we'll try to answer common questions here and talk about motivations for working on this project.

# Goals of the project

The goal of this repo is to **write C code that, after being compiled, matches the PowerPC assembly 100%**. There's a bit of nuance here though. Let’s first take a look at what we’re working with:

![compilation_diagram](images/compilation_diagram.png)

The details for what produces these different artifacts is out-of-scope. Here’s what some Melee C code looks like:

```c
void func_8007B8CC(Fighter* fp, HSD_GObj* otherObj) {
    Fighter* otherFp;

    otherFp = getFighter(otherObj);
    ((u32 *)fp)[0x466] = (u32) otherObj;
    fp->x119C_teamUnk = (u8) otherFp->x61B_team;
    fp->x119D = (u8) otherFp->xC_playerID;

> }

Reviewer: This is... not clean code at all. Maybe that's what we want, or maybe we should find a prettier snippet to showcase.

Author: 🤷 . I picked it because it was short and I did it and it's kind of reasonable how it translates to Assembly by looking at it (with only one semantic jump into the `getFighter`). It emphasizes But yeah, a prettier

Reviewer: How about this?
https://github.com/doldecomp/melee/blob/4f6e017127ae2f00f359d89fc417d7f77e95f764/src/melee/ft/chara/ftFox/ftFox_SpecialLw.c#L78-L90

Author: mm, sure. the assembly is a little long, but should be fine.

Author: also, the C code includes the `inline`

Author: https://decomp.me/scratch/dDVIh

Author: yeah, actually this one is too long. looking around

Author: https://decomp.me/scratch/ZN9lq i think this one is good! changing

Reviewer: Callbacks are a little advanced, but the asm is simple so it seems fine.

/* 8007B8CC 000784AC  80 A4 00 2C */	lwz r5, 0x2c(r4)
/* 8007B8D0 000784B0  90 83 11 98 */	stw r4, 0x1198(r3)
/* 8007B8D4 000784B4  88 05 06 1B */	lbz r0, 0x61b(r5)
/* 8007B8D8 000784B8  98 03 11 9C */	stb r0, 0x119c(r3)
/* 8007B8DC 000784BC  88 05 00 0C */	lbz r0, 0xc(r5)
/* 8007B8E0 000784C0  98 03 11 9D */	stb r0, 0x119d(r3)
/* 8007B8E4 000784C4  4E 80 00 20 */	blr
```

So the repo is filled with `.s` files and `.c` files, where the C code inside the `.c` files should have translated 100% to some contents in a `.s` file that used to be in the repo. Note that once we successfully decompile a function, we normally remove it from the assembly.

# Do we have to write all this C code by hand?

No! And even initially, the code doesn’t have to be super-readable as we’re trying to get 100% match rate first.

So you can actually view the above example in an online tool that we use called decomp.me. Here’s a link to [that specific decompliation](https://decomp.me/scratch/MLlcK). If you want to try doing this yourself, follow these steps:

1. Copy the assembly in the example
2. Hit “New Scratch”
3. Select Platform “GameCube / Wii”
4. Set the preset to “Super Smash Bros. Melee”

> 5. Copy in the contents of [this link](https://gist.github.com/stephenjayakar/73e9f7a1f77b9b2df281f0629b95290c) into the “Context” section. More on that later

Reviewer: A static context will not be sufficient most of the time. Our tools for generating context are a bit rough around the edges at the moment, so we'll need to clean those up and add usage instructions to this document. You (@stephenjayakar) should take a look at `gen.sh` to see how we're doing that right now.

```suggestion
5. Copy in the contents of [this link](https://gist.github.com/stephenjayakar/73e9f7a1f77b9b2df281f0629b95290c) into the “Context” section. More on that later.
```

Author: uh... how exactly _do_ the commands in gen.sh work? I also didn't know at all about the tools/ directory -- some documentation around those would be helpful too.

Reviewer: We'll have to open another PR to document those, it's something I've been meaning to do. This is fine for now.

```c
temp_r5 = arg1->unk2C;
```

which can be translated in kind-of-English as “tempR5 takes the value at the memory address of `arg1 + 0x2c`.” If you don’t know anything about `arg1`, you can translate it to sketchy-C

```c
// The u8* conversion is because C automatically figures out pointer size for
// you, which means for an s32, you'd have to do arg1 + 0x2c / 4
temp_r5 = *((s32 *) ((u8 *) arg1 + 0x2c))
```

…while this accomplishes the goal of getting a 100% match (you could pretty much do every memory access and set like this), we actually can guess what `arg1` is in this case because of the file it’s in. You can do some digging yourself, but that line ends up translating to something like:

```c
Fighter* otherFp;
otherFp = getFighter(otherObj);
```

## What was going on with the Context?

Think of the context as a giant header file which you then `#include` at the top of your file. You can actually generate this yourself by using `gcc -E`, but a TODO on how to do this.

# Alright, how do I try decompiling?

So you want to find some assembly that:

- no one is working on
- isn’t that long as you’re new
- isn’t already decompiled

> In [this public Trello board](https://trello.com/b/pz2ACtnS/melee-decompilation), you can see which Assembly files have been claimed or unclaimed. So don’t pick a function in a `.s` file that’s claimed.

Reviewer: Note that this Trello link will not auto-invite the user, unlike the one in our Discord, but I don't think we should put that link here. Perhaps mention the difference, though.

![compilation_diagram](images/compilation_diagram.png)

The details for what produces these different artifacts is out-of-scope. Here’s what some Melee C code looks like ([link](https://github.com/doldecomp/melee/blob/d00b11d0489b14401965c87bf386828d54fa0ccc/src/melee/ft/chara/ftMewtwo/ftMewtwo_SpecialHi.c#L5-L13)):

```c
void ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_CreateGFX(HSD_GObj* fighter_gobj)
{
    Fighter* fp = getFighter(fighter_gobj);

    ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_SetStartGFX(fighter_gobj);
    fp->cb.x21BC_callback_Accessory4 = NULL;
}
```

and it’s corresponding PowerPC assembly:

```asm

> .global func_801450A0
> func_801450A0:
>     mflr r0
>     stw r0,4(r1)
>     stwu r1,-0x18(r1)
>     stw r31,0x14(r1)
>     lwz r31,0x2c(r3)
>     bl func_801450D4
>     li r0,0
>     stw r0,0x21bc(r31)
>     lwz r0,0x1c(r1)
>     lwz r31,0x14(r1)
>     addi r1,r1,0x18
>     mtlr r0
>     blr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.global ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_CreateGFX
ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_CreateGFX:
/* 801450A0 00000000  7C 08 02 A6 */	mflr r0
/* 801450A4 00000004  90 01 00 04 */	stw r0, 0x4(r1)
/* 801450A8 00000008  94 21 FF E8 */	stwu r1, -0x18(r1)
/* 801450AC 0000000C  93 E1 00 14 */	stw r31, 0x14(r1)
/* 801450B0 00000010  83 E3 00 2C */	lwz r31, 0x2c(r3)
/* 801450B4 00000014  48 00 00 21 */	bl ftMewtwo_SpecialHi_SetStartGFX
/* 801450B8 00000018  38 00 00 00 */	li r0, 0x0
/* 801450BC 0000001C  90 1F 21 BC */	stw r0, 0x21bc(r31)
/* 801450C0 00000020  80 01 00 1C */	lwz r0, 0x1c(r1)
/* 801450C4 00000024  83 E1 00 14 */	lwz r31, 0x14(r1)
/* 801450C8 00000028  38 21 00 18 */	addi r1, r1, 0x18
/* 801450CC 0000002C  7C 08 03 A6 */	mtlr r0
/* 801450D0 00000030  4E 80 00 20 */	blr
```

No! And even initially, the code doesn’t have to be super-readable as we’re trying to get 100% match rate first.

> So you can actually view the above example in an online tool that we use called decomp.me. Here’s a link to [that specific decompliation](https://decomp.me/scratch/ZN9lq). If you want to try doing this yourself, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So you can actually view the above example in an online tool that we use called decomp.me. Here’s a link to [that specific decompliation](https://decomp.me/scratch/VP0Gj). If you want to try doing this yourself, follow these steps:
```

When you initially create a new “scratch” in this site, it’ll actually do its best to decompile the assembly you give it (try hitting the “Decompile” button in the link). You’ll notice things it spits out like

```c
temp_r31 = arg0->unk2C;
```

> which can be translated in kind-of-English as “tempr31 takes the value at the memory address of `arg0 + 0x2c`.” If you don’t know anything about `arg1`, you can translate it to sketchy-C

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which can be translated in kind-of-English as “`temp_r31` takes the value at the memory address of `arg0 + 0x2c`.” If you don’t know anything about `arg1`, you can translate it to sketchy-C
```
